In the cyclotron, we had an experiment where we had a lot of detectors because particles fly out in all directions.
And so when I got to thinking about nuclear medicine being a better place for nuclear physicists, well, I thought of these systems where you have a big ring of detectors
like a CAT scan.
And so my system, it's called positron emission tomography, it's called PET for positron emission tomography.
And it has a ring of detectors.
So all that we knew about detectors and how to massage the data and everything, I'd learned at the cyclotron.
So I just transferred that technology over to medicine.
But other people had been doing this, but I decided to use optical fibers to pick up the light from the detectors, and nobody had ever tried that.
And maybe they were smart.
It took me a long time to make it work.
But maybe I should give the successful end of the story.
My last graduate student finished about 2000, I guess, and he's working in one of these
What do they call them?
It's something like the Cyclotron.
It does research with the sponsorship of the University of Texas, but they're not in a department at the University of Texas.
They get their outside funding.
Think tank, that's what I'm trying to think of.
Well, it turns out this think tank is supported by the Navy.
And they hired my ex-student because of his experience in what they call tomography.
If you have a lot of detectors all around, and you have a source in the middle, and you detect radiation or whatever from the source, you can use mathematics to calculate where that source is.
So that's why you use it in the human body.
You can, well glucose for example, you can make it radioactive.
When you're thinking, you burn glucose and so all the, you put radioactive glucose, stick it in somebody's arm, he starts to think and it all ends up where he's thinking and this is how you can tell where your thinking happens, where your optic nerve is and
It's really a tremendous breakthrough because you know about the mind-body problem, and here you've got for the first time somebody says, I'm thinking, and then that's the mind, but then the body with a tomograph says, well, this is where it's going on right up here.
Well, anyway, the Navy was interested because if they want to find a submarine that's making some noise and they pick up the sound all around using tomography, they can find where the submarine is.
So they're supporting tomography and the oil companies use it.
The rock where there's oil bounces sound off and that's why they can drill way under the Gulf of Mexico now where they couldn't before because they have this tomography.
So anyway, they're supporting tomography and they've just agreed in the last few months to support
the continuation of our tomograph here, which he did his thesis on, and we're going to transfer all the equipment the next few weeks over to Texas.
And he's writing a proposal to the National Institutes of Health, which is supporting this kind of work.
So it really looks promising.
It has some advantages over the old methods.
Now, let's see, you said you got that finished in 80?
That's when I got the first idea.
That's when I wrote a proposal and got money from the Cancer Society.
That was 1980, and now 2000, we finally got a system that's really working like we want it to.
During all of your years as an active member of the physics department, who were your closest colleagues?
Well, probably the ones that I hired when I was hiring for the cyclotron.
In fact, when we were having the big
fight was subtle, we more or less went on strike and said we're not going to write a proposal, because this chief engineer doesn't know what he's doing.
You know, everybody went on strike with me, so those have been my closest friends I guess.
And some of them are retiring now.
Who were they by name?
Oh.
Well Northcliffe died.
Let's see, John?
No, it wasn't John.
It was Lee Northcliffe.
Lee, yeah.
Jack Heberts, retired.
He was the one who came from Yale and went to Oak Ridge and worked on our equipment for a couple of years and then came here.
And Bob Kennefic was another one that we hired at the beginning to do the first research at the cyclotron.
And if you turned to anybody for suggestions, advice, evaluation of an idea, you know, what do you think of the, who would that have been?
Who did you?
Oh, I guess I'm kind of a lone wolf.
First of all, I went into nuclear medicine, which is, I'm the only one doing it.
So, and I never built up a school
or try to get more faculty members, because I always had the idea that I'd start a small company and build these things.
And I did start a small company and wrote some proposals, but we never got money for the small company.
So the fact that I was going to move outside the department, and this is one of the big problems with universities, and I'm sure you know, that a lot of things look nice in the laboratory,
But getting them out into commercial use, there's a big gap in there.
And I was going to fill the gap.
I had the thing working in the department.
I was going to get money from a small business corporation and build some units and then start manufacturing them.
Well, with that in mind, I didn't
try to get assistant professors hired and, you know, like most senior professors do, I guess.
Did the physics department in the 80s and 90s, were there regular meetings of the department?
Did it get together as a group very often?
Oh, yeah.
At least once a month.
You know, that's what PLOS did that was
was important.
He got a department that functioned like a department.
Describe his manner and style of leadership.
Well, it was, except most departments have what they call a chairman, and he acted more like a chairman.
And I was the head of the
appointments and promotions committee for a while, and we worked closely together about hiring people and things like that.
Well, he's a very perceptive person and a good man to talk to about hiring people.
And we talked about, well, essentially, under him, we built up the department.
We have a very strong quantum optics now under Scully.
There wasn't any optics when I came.
Plus brought Katowar, who was in atmospheric physics.
So we'd build up optics.
That was the main thing.
Of course, we tried to build up strong groups, and there was the cyclotron that was obviously a strong group.
Then there's a theoretical group.
which, well, it got a big push from the Super Collider.
Somehow A&M got a million dollars or something to get professorships, and so they were able to hire some very good people.
In fact, one of our best people got hired away by Michigan to start up a research institute at Michigan.
Now, during the 80s and 90s, was A&M reasonably competitive in terms of salaries and so forth?
Well, as far as I know, I get a little put out by, I don't think academic people are very honest myself.
Whenever they start talking about salaries, they compare the salaries here with those in Boston and Seattle and California.
They never mention the cost of living here is about 20% less.
Yeah.
I don't know, I just think it's dishonest, and it makes a big difference.
Did the graduate program in physics grow during those decades?
Well that's the problem now.
I remember when Zener was planning ahead, and this
I mean, it was the heady days when they got the cyclotron.
Everybody thought the future of the world was in nuclear physics.
And he was going to have 300 graduate students.
I remember him proposing that.
We're lucky if we get 20 now.
And we're sending people out.
They've taken the teaching load away from one person to go out and talk all around the state and try to round up some graduate students.
It was bad when I came, though.
I mean, Squire really demeaned Potter, and people heard that.
And Potter had friends all over Texas.
In the year after Squire became department head, we had one graduate student.
That's what got Rudder's attention.
Otherwise, he didn't care if anybody liked Potter or Squire or whatever.
But when there's only one graduate student applies, something's got to be done.
So we were pretty low to begin with, but the cyclotron gave us a big boost.
A lot of people came here and wanted to work on the cyclotron.
It was a competitive research facility that young Texans wanted to get involved with, that's all.
We got one really good student from Rice.
We don't get many from Rice or Texas, but he worked with me, and then he went, because he was very good, I got him a job with Hofstadter at Stanford, and Hofstadter was planning a big telescope on the, well, a gamma ray telescope on a satellite.
And so this student, after he left Hofstadter, went to work for TRW, who was building the satellite.
Well now I've got a Christmas card from him.
He says, we put in a proposal for the next Hubble telescope, and if we get it, I'll be director of the next Hubble telescope.
So we're getting some Aggies up there.
So that's the quality of students we had.
About how many in the 80s and 90s, about how many doctoral students completed degrees in physics per year?
About how many doctoral graduates?
Well, you've got the wrong person here.
I didn't have many in the 80s because I was building equipment.
I was hiring a lot of undergraduates and shop people to build it, but I didn't have PhDs until the 90s.
I only had one Ph.D.
in the 90s, I guess.
I had a couple of master's degrees, or three or four, I guess.
But other people were much more active in graduate students than I was.
Let's see, fraternal life.
Where did you and your colleagues, where did you all have coffee?
Where did you take coffee breaks?
Oh.
Well, we usually ate lunch together.
Where?
Coach Norton's was where we started out, right across the street there.
And then what happened?
Well, because I left the cyclotron, a lot of the people I'd been going out to lunch with I didn't go out to lunch with anymore.
I guess I
I'd take a break in the afternoon, but I like to relax.
When I relax, I relax by not talking to people.
So I take over a magazine or something.
That was the nice thing.
Physics is one of the choicest pieces of real estate on the campus.
It's about halfway between the library and the MSC.
Did you and your buddies go to the MSC very much?
Well, yeah, some of the people did.
almost every day.
But I'm not, there's two kinds of people.
There's the pub and the club.
And the pub people all get together and talk, and when I go to the catalog, they all are talking with each other.
And I'm a club person who gets my newspaper and reads and don't want to be disturbed.
So it's my personality, I guess.
All right, let's digress back over on family life.
When you and your wife and youngster got here, in what activities did you become involved in the community?
Well, we went to the Baptist Church in College Station, but then we never joined because I'd been baptized and I didn't want to be baptized a second time.
So then we went to the First Presbyterian Church
I guess our lives were more or less centered on the church.
But I remember Dick Thomas, when I first arrived within five minutes, he said, well, we don't believe in predestination.
And since I did believe in predestination, that wasn't a very good advertisement for it.
But it was as congenial as the Baptists just
Well, I don't know.
It isn't just baptism.
Their style is just different than mine.
The Presbyterian's more my style.
And the Grace Bible Church I would have liked, but they have this, they believe in this dispensationalism, which, well, I'm a Calvinist.
Alright, now did you grow up a Calvinist?
Well, I grew up in a congregational church that didn't leave much of anything.
It grew out of Calvinism, and we learned a lot about the Bible.
We memorized the Beatitudes and the 23rd Psalm, and my mother had us learn a lot of things, but we never heard about sin or atonement or anything of Calvinism.
The congregational church was all social action, and that's what
attracted me to the Presbyterian Church is because they have a theology and the Westminster Confession and things like that.
All right, and then you became one of the founders of the Westminster.
Yeah, Presbyterian Church.
And have you all remained active in it?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, that's our family, really.
I mean, when you get older, it's nice to have all these young people around.
We have about 80 Aggies every Sunday there.
What other activities did you and your wife participate in or attend here?
Well, we liked to go to the concerts, and we didn't have or take time anyway to, we'd give money, but we didn't participate in or organize.
Now, there, the places, of course, contributed a tremendous amount.
When you say concerts, you're meaning Opus.
Opus, yeah, yeah.
Any other special social evening?
Where did y'all vacation?
Well, I promised Madeline we'd get out of Texas every summer.
So, we've been vacationing up in Oregon, on the Oregon coast.
My brother lives in Seattle, and when he was recruiting,
he'd have weekends and he'd go over to the Oregon coast.
And so he knew some good places there.
And so that's, we've been going to the same place for about 12 years now.
Are there any special friends that y'all have made here?
Well, in the church mainly.
As I said, it's kind of like our family.
People that we see every week and, well, we go to a lot of dinners and
things like that with each other.
All right.
Then you ended up living where on a long-term basis?
Living where?
Yeah.
Oh.
Well, we live in Bryan.
What street?
Oh.
Well, it's just off Carter Creek.
Well, it's on Bristol Street.
It's a dead end street, which is nice for children.
And when did y'all move there?
Well, we moved there the
after we'd been here one year and then the rented house we moved there.
And I was invited to give some talks in Russia so I had to prepare for those talks and we were, we thought we had a house but the daughter got married and had to take it over so fortunately Madeline found this house for us on Bristol Street where we moved in and stayed.
Now did
Did a non-Texan have any learning experience here?
Do you remember any, probably humorous?
Well, I remember fixing to.
My secretary kept saying, I'm fixing to, and I said, well, why do you keep saying that?
And she said, well, how would you say it?
That was a good question.
I guess we say I'm going to or something like that.
Well, another thing that strikes me, we go on vacations.
But here you go on leave, and it's like joining the Army, really.
And I notice we have headquarters over here instead of the central office or something like that.
So we notice those things.
So we like Texans very much.
They've been very friendly, and we've enjoyed them.
What are some of the happiest moments you remember as a faculty member, as a scholar here?
Some proudest moments you remember for you?
Oh, I don't know.
I guess publishing papers is the thing I put my thought on, and... Of all your publications, of which one are you most proud?
Well, I think the last one's on this tomograph because it's really original.
It's all that I've done.
Whereas doing another experiment at the cyclotron is, even though it's different than somebody else's experiment, it isn't all that different.
So I feel more, what's the right word about your own children?
The research on the tomograph is closer to my heart than the
Now that's spelled T-O-M-O?
Yeah.
That comes, that's in atom, A-T-O-M.
It means indivisible.
And it means, in this case, it means a slice.
The ring that you put around takes a slice through your body.
Are you still doing some work on that?
Well...
Yeah, just Saturday, the graduate student drove over from Austin.
He's writing up his research, his thesis.
And we went over it, and I made some suggestions.
And he's a very smart guy.
He's very good.
And he's done what's called a Monte Carlo calculation.
I don't know whether you're familiar with those or not.
But essentially, you do a computer calculation of what's happening.
And I always think of doing an experiment to find out what's happening.
But once you've got this computer program, you just plug in the dimensions of the system, and it churns out the answer for you.
So he's been able to compare our results with the commercial results by just using his program.
And it shows our results are very competitive, and we have some other advantages.
So the whole thing's turning out to be
It's ended up very well.
The idea that I had in 1980 turns out to be workable.
But do you still come back to the campus fairly often?
Oh, once a month or so.
It's so hard to, I have to hike.
Well, now it's getting hot even.
The parking?
Yeah, the parking.
But even the old parking,
It was a fairly good hike from the Northgate lot and North lot there.
So I, all my mail comes home now and mainly the junk mail comes to the office.
Let's see, I was asking for high moments.
Do you remember any silly moments in class or when the lab experiment went goofy or anything like that?
I probably suppressed it in my memory.
And I presume no truly sad moments or tragic, never, no one ever injured badly in an accident or in the lab or anything.
Well, I remember one silly moment.
It was when I first got here.
In order to get on the health program, I had to have an examination at the health center.
So I was sitting there waiting, and suddenly there was a great commotion.
Everybody went running down the hall.
And when they asked somebody, I said, what's happened?
They said, well, graduate student's been injured.
And so I said, has he been electrocuted?
No, he got kicked by a cow.
I thought, well, I guess this is where I am.
Did the students ever attempt any jokes or pranks on you?
No, I guess not.
I guess I'm too reserved or something, which I'm just as happy about.
I'd probably get mad if they did.
And no goofy phone calls in the middle of the night.
No.
Let's see.
Politics never got involved to, no one ever said, no, no, no, you don't do research on that kind of thing.
Oh, no.
Nobody ever tried to create any barriers here.
No, it's been very good that way.
I mean, they have a very, and nobody's ever tried to,
you know, steal any money or anything.
As far as I can see, everybody's very careful about handling money.
And I've never seen anybody trying to cut corners.
As you, please try to compare the quality of the students in your first years and in your last years.
How did the A&M student body change?
Well, I think the girls improved.
quality as far as the academic quality goes.
I hired a number of the girls to work on my research because, you know, they're just smart kids that work hard.
And so I'd say that it's the undergraduates, they're the ones I've been involved with, have improved.
Now, this graduate student I have is extremely good, though.
I'd say he's the one I just finished.
It's, you know, comparable to the one who's going to run the space telescope someday.
And... Now, are there many young ladies that major in physics?
Is physics... Yeah, in fact, the wife of this graduate student was a major in physics, graduated here in physics a couple years ago.
So physics isn't seen as a male-only discipline.
Well, I think it is kind of.
We don't have many, many men.
And I don't think it's the culture myself, because a lot of women go into medicine.
And I think the culture there is, with the nurses and everything, is much more hierarchical with the men in charge than in physics.
It's a puzzle to me.
I mean, here the women will take frogs apart and
put their elbows up in gore, and then in physics you have a nice clean screwdriver and hook wires together.
I think it's the problem solving part of it.
And I was trying to think of the word before, math anxiety.
I guess it's just that analytical thinking that, and also the boys,
have a feel for how things go.
They know when a car goes around a corner you tend to swing off to the side.
I think it's a bunch of things, but I've seen very little anti-woman examples in physics.
And we hired one lady from Berkeley to be on the faculty
and she just didn't match up with the men we had, so we let her go.
Well, she sued us.
I mean, the poor department had had us take his whole Christmas vacation going back over all the people we had promoted, and I mean,
It almost makes you wonder if you should hire a woman.
I guess it's the same problem with the blacks, because you can't get rid of them.
Did she allege discrimination?
Yeah.
Did she win?
No.
Well, he dug up enough, I don't know, it's very hard, as you know, for promotions to be objective.
You just know somebody's a good physicist, that's all, and you can't write it down.
How would you evaluate, in general, A&M's quality in relating the students and so forth, in relating to different cultures?
Like, I have the opinion that there were no problems here with racial integration.
that it wasn't easy for some of the first women.
But did you see, in your classes, did you see good interaction of people in terms of class?
Yeah, for a while in the 80s, the women went up to maybe one-third of the class.
I doubt if they're that high now.
And they got some of the top grades, too.
As I said, they made the men work hard.
So, no, as far as I could tell, there was never a problem.
I can tell you a story about Rudder and the racial integration.
Andy Suttle told me this.
He said Rudder brought in the commander of the Corps of Cadets and said, look, we're going to have a black in there.
If anything happens to him, your career in the Army is finished.
That's how the Army works, I guess.
So I'm sure he pushed it on down the line.
And that's how it got, and they were never in any trouble.
Let's see, evaluation of, and I'm not going to ask negative, evaluation of deans.
To which deans of science would you give the highest marks during your years?
Well, I didn't like Prescott very well because he didn't like PLOS, I guess.
He, I forgot who he replaced PLOS with.
Maybe Adair was an assistant.
Anyhow, he said he knows where every paperclip is.
That was Prescott.
Now, to me, a good department head does not know where every paperclip is.
He's worrying about what research is going on.
And so that was just an example of Prescott was just in the wrong neighborhood when it came to understand academic people.
But you give high marks to whom?
Well, I liked Zener, although he was kind of a, I guess, I don't know.
He was a nice man, and I don't know whether he was a good dean, though.
He made this terrible mistake with Squire.
And he probably should have stayed as a professor and not got into management.
Well, you know, as well as I do, better than I do, I'm sure, that it isn't easy to go into management from being a professor.
And probably most people don't do it very well.
And... All right, what about the chief academic officers?
Now we call it provosts, used to be vice president of academic officers.
Yeah, well, those people are so far away from me.
But Wayne Hall or what?